docs(self-managed): Secret Management Guide (#5454)
camunda/camunda-docs: versioned_docs/version-8.6/self-managed/setup/guides/secret-management.md

---
id: secret-management
title: "Managing Secrets in Camunda 8 Self-Managed"
description: "A comprehensive guide on configuring and managing secrets in Camunda 8, including Keycloak, OAuth client secrets, and first-user authentication."
---

# Managing Secrets in Helm Charts

## Overview

> This guide provides detailed instructions for configuring and managing secrets when using the official Helm chart. It covers:
> 
> - Internal secrets: Used by Camunda applications
> - External secrets: Used for third party configuration
> - Secure handling of Kubernetes secrets
> - Practical YAML configuration examples, including PostgreSQL, TLS, OAuth clients
> - Best practices for upgrades and secret management

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide provides detailed instructions for configuring and managing secrets when using the official Helm chart.
```

Author: done

| **Identity PostgreSQL Password**     | `identityPostgresql.auth.existingSecret`                                                                                      | Password for embedded PostgreSQL used by Identity                 | Generated by default if not set |
| **Keycloak PostgreSQL Password**     | `identityKeycloak.auth.existingSecret`                                                                                        | Password for embedded PostgreSQL used by Keycloak                 | Generated by default if not set |
| **Web Modeler PostgreSQL Password**  | `postgresql.auth.existingSecret`, `postgresql.auth.secretKeys.adminPasswordKey`, `postgresql.auth.secretKeys.userPasswordKey` | Passwords for Web Modeler's embedded PostgreSQL via Bitnami chart | Generated by default if not set |
| **Enterprise License Key**           | `global.license.existingSecret`, `global.license.existingSecretKey`                                                           | Camunda Enterprise License Key                                    | Not set unless provided         |

---

> ## Disabling Auto-Generated Secrets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Disabling Auto-Generated Secrets
```

By default, the Camunda Helm chart auto-generates secrets like OAuth client passwords on first install. This ensures the platform can start without manual configuration but can lead to issues on upgrades if the secrets are regenerated.

To use only user-defined secrets and prevent regeneration during upgrades:

```yaml
global:
  secrets:
    autoGenerated: false
```

This will stop auto-generating secrets. Ensure:

- All required secrets are created
- The `existingSecretKey` values match the keys in the Kubernetes Secret
- Secrets exist in the correct namespace

---

## External Secrets

These secrets are necessary when integrating Camunda with third-party services.

> ### External Databases and Mail Services

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

---
id: secret-management
title: "Managing Secrets in Camunda 8 Self-Managed"
description: "A comprehensive guide on configuring and managing secrets in Camunda 8, including Keycloak, OAuth client secrets, and first-user authentication."
---

# Managing Secrets in Helm Charts

## Overview

This guide provides detailed instructions for configuring and managing secrets when using the official Helm Chart. It covers:

- Internal secrets: secrets used by the C8 apps
- External secrets: secrests used for third party configuration
- Secure handling of Kubernetes secrets
- Practical YAML configuration examples, including PostgreSQL, TLS, OAuth clients
- Best practices for upgrades and secret management

---

## Internal Secrets

> These secrets are used by Camunda applications, and created and managed by the Helm Chart unless explicitly configured.

Author: done

| **Keycloak PostgreSQL Password**    | `identityKeycloak.auth.existingSecret`                                                                                        | Password for embedded PostgreSQL used by Keycloak                 | Generated by default if not set |
| **Web Modeler PostgreSQL Password** | `postgresql.auth.existingSecret`, `postgresql.auth.secretKeys.adminPasswordKey`, `postgresql.auth.secretKeys.userPasswordKey` | Passwords for Web Modeler's embedded PostgreSQL via Bitnami chart | Generated by default if not set |

### License Secrets

| **Secret**                 | **Chart Values Key**                                                | **Purpose**                    | **Default Behavior**    |
| -------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------ | ----------------------- |
| **Enterprise License Key** | `global.license.existingSecret`, `global.license.existingSecretKey` | Camunda Enterprise License Key | Not set unless provided |

---

## Optional Secrets Based on Configuration

Some secrets are required only in specific configurations. The following are common conditional cases:

> - 🔸 **`webModeler.restapi.externalDatabase.existingSecret`** – If using an external PostgreSQL database.

Author: we removed this section

---

## Referencing Secrets in `values.yaml`

> ✅ **Best Practice:** Use the structured form (`existingSecret.name` and `existingSecretKey`) when working with internal secrets. It allows more precise control over which keys are used and promotes reuse of secrets across components.

There are two primary patterns for referencing secrets, depending on the chart and component:

- Use `existingSecret` (flat string) for **simple secrets** such as external database passwords or SMTP credentials.
- Use `existingSecret.name` and `existingSecretKey` (structured form) for **internal secrets** like OAuth client passwords, where the chart expects to access a specific key inside the secret.

> ℹ️ If a field supports the structured format, it's generally safer and clearer to use it.
> The structured format also enables more consistent secret reuse across multiple components.

### Flat String Example

```yaml
webModeler:
  restapi:
    externalDatabase:
      existingSecret: my-db-secret
```

> 

Author: this section was removed

### Structured Example (Recommended)

```yaml
global:
  identity:
    auth:
      operate:
        existingSecret:
          name: camunda-credentials
        existingSecretKey: operate-secret
```

---

## Creating Kubernetes Secrets

Secrets may be created manually using the kubectl CLI or defined in Kubernetes manifests. For more examples, see [Create Identity Secrets in the Camunda Docs](https://docs.camunda.io/docs/self-managed/setup/install/#create-identity-secrets).

To create a secret via `kubectl`::

```sh
kubectl create secret generic camunda-credentials \
  --from-literal=operate-secret=S3cure0p3rat3 \
  --from-literal=tasklist-secret=S3cureT4sk \
  --from-literal=optimize-secret=S3cure0pt1mz \
  --namespace camunda
```

Or using YAML:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: camunda-credentials
  namespace: camunda
type: Opaque
stringData:
  operate-secret: "S3cure0p3rat3"
  tasklist-secret: "S3cureT4sk"
  optimize-secret: "S3cure0pt1mz"
```

Apply it with:

```sh
kubectl apply -f my-secret.yaml
```

---

> ## Centralized Secret Example

Author: done

---
id: secret-management
title: "Managing Secrets in Camunda 8 Self-Managed"
description: "A comprehensive guide on configuring and managing secrets in Camunda 8, including Keycloak, OAuth client secrets, and first-user authentication."
---

# Camunda Platform Helm Chart – Secrets Management

## Overview

> This guide provides a comprehensive reference for managing secrets in **Camunda 8 Self-Managed** when using the official Helm Chart. It includes:

Author: Yea I agree was more focused on the actual secrets thanks!

- A complete list of internal and external secrets
- How to create and reference Kubernetes secrets securely
- Real-world YAML examples for PostgreSQL, TLS, OAuth clients, and more

> - Best practices to prevent common pitfalls during upgrades and secret regeneration

Author: for now I just updated it with the suggestion.

---

> ## Internal Secrets Reference Table

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Internal Secrets
```

> These secrets are generated and managed internally by Camunda’s Helm Chart.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These secrets are used by Camunda applications, and created and managed by the Helm Chart unless explicitly configured.
```

Author: done

| **Keycloak Admin Password**      | `identity.keycloak.auth.adminPassword`, `identity.keycloak.auth.existingSecret`      | Admin password for Keycloak (Camunda Identity)       | Randomly generated if not set |
| **Keycloak Management Password** | `identity.keycloak.auth.managementPassword`, `identity.keycloak.auth.existingSecret` | Internal password for Identity service communication | Randomly generated if not set |
| **Identity First User Password** | `identity.firstUser.password`, `identity.firstUser.existingSecret`                   | Default user password (`demo/demo`)                  | `demo` unless overridden      |

### OAuth Client Secrets

| **Secret**                           | **Chart Values Key**                                                                                    | **Purpose**                                            | **Default Behavior**          |
| ------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------ | ----------------------------- |

> | **OAuth Client Secret (Operate)**    | `global.identity.auth.operate.existingSecret.name`, `global.identity.auth.operate.existingSecret`       | OAuth client secret for Operate                        | Randomly generated if not set |

Author: It can go either way. Im ok committing this.

| ----------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------- |
| **Identity PostgreSQL Password**    | `identityPostgresql.auth.existingSecret`                                                                                      | Password for embedded PostgreSQL used by Identity                 | Randomly generated if not set |
| **Keycloak PostgreSQL Password**    | `identityKeycloak.auth.existingSecret`                                                                                        | Password for embedded PostgreSQL used by Keycloak                 | Randomly generated if not set |
| **Web Modeler PostgreSQL Password** | `postgresql.auth.existingSecret`, `postgresql.auth.secretKeys.adminPasswordKey`, `postgresql.auth.secretKeys.userPasswordKey` | Passwords for Web Modeler's embedded PostgreSQL via Bitnami chart | Randomly generated if not set |

> ### Other

Author: done

| **Secret**                 | **Chart Values Key**                                                | **Purpose**                    | **Default Behavior**    |
| -------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------ | ----------------------- |
| **Enterprise License Key** | `global.license.existingSecret`, `global.license.existingSecretKey` | Camunda Enterprise License Key | Not set unless provided |

---

## Optional Secrets Based on Configuration

> Some secrets are only required based on your setup. Below are common conditional cases:

Author: fixed

> - 🔸 **`webModeler.restapi.externalDatabase.existingSecret`** – Required **only if** `postgresql.enabled: false` and you're using an external database.

Author: done

> - 🔸 **`webModeler.restapi.mail.existingSecret`** – Required **only if** you enable SMTP for email invites or notifications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 🔸 **`webModeler.restapi.mail.existingSecret`** – If SMTP is enabled for email features.
```

> - 🔸 **`connectors.inbound.auth.existingSecret`** – Needed when **basic authentication** is enabled for inbound connectors (instead of SSO).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 🔸 **`connectors.inbound.auth.existingSecret`** – If basic auth is used for inbound connectors.
```

Author: done

> - 🔸 **`global.license.existingSecret`** – Needed **only for Camunda Enterprise** users to apply a valid license.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 🔸 **`global.license.existingSecret`**  Required for enterprise licensing.
```

Reviewer: This is also listed in Others - whats the difference?

Author: done

---

> ## External Secrets Reference Table

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## External Secrets
```

Author: done

> These secrets are required when integrating Camunda with external services:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These secrets are necessary when integrating Camunda with third-party services.
```

Author: done

> ### External Databases and Services

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### External Databases and Mail Services
```

Author: done

| ------------------------------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------- |
| **External Database Password**       | `webModeler.restapi.externalDatabase.existingSecret`, `webModeler.restapi.externalDatabase.existingSecret.name` | Password for external PostgreSQL if using an external DB | Not set unless provided |
| **SMTP Password**                    | `webModeler.restapi.mail.existingSecret`                                                                        | SMTP credentials for sending email notifications         | Not set unless provided |
| **Connectors Inbound Auth Password** | `connectors.inbound.auth.existingSecret`, `connectors.inbound.auth.existingSecretKey`                           | Basic auth password for Connectors polling Operate       | Not set unless provided |

> ### External Search (Elasticsearch / OpenSearch)

Reviewer: Wondering if External Search is correct here? Why not merging this with the top and add ti to external databases?

Author: done

| **External OpenSearch TLS Cert**    | `global.opensearch.tls.existingSecret`     | TLS certificate for external OpenSearch over SSL                | Not set unless provided |

---

## Referencing Secrets in `values.yaml`

> ✅ **Best Practice:** Use the structured form (`existingSecret.name` and `existingSecretKey`) when working with internal secrets. It allows more precise control over which keys are used and promotes reuse of secrets across components.

There are two primary patterns for referencing secrets, depending on the chart and component:

- Use `existingSecret` (flat string) for **simple secrets** such as external database passwords or SMTP credentials.
- Use `existingSecret.name` and `existingSecretKey` (structured form) for **internal secrets** like OAuth client passwords, where the chart expects to access a specific key inside the secret.

> ℹ️ If a field supports the structured format, it's generally safer and clearer to use it.
> The structured format also enables more consistent secret reuse across multiple components.

> 

Reviewer: Use Use the correct format to avoid configuration errors:
- Flat string (`existingSecret`): For simple references like external DBs or SMTP.
- Structured (`existingSecret.name` and `existingSecretKey`): Recommended for internal secrets and OAuth client to access a specific key reference.

> ### Simple (Flat String)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Flat String Example
```

Author: done

```yaml
webModeler:
  restapi:
    externalDatabase:
      existingSecret: my-db-secret
```

> ### Structured (Recommended for internal secrets)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Structured Example (Recommended)
```

```yaml
global:
  identity:
    auth:
      operate:
        existingSecret:
          name: camunda-platform-secrets
        existingSecretKey: operate-secret
```

---

## Creating Kubernetes Secrets

> You can create secrets manually or using manifests. For more examples, see [Create Identity Secrets in the Camunda Docs](https://docs.camunda.io/docs/self-managed/setup/install/#create-identity-secrets).
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: this was reworded and changed

> Here's how to create one via `kubectl`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a secret via `kubectl`:
```

Author: done

```sh
kubectl create secret generic camunda-platform-secrets \
  --from-literal=operate-secret=S3cure0p3rat3 \
  --from-literal=tasklist-secret=S3cureT4sk \
  --from-literal=optimize-secret=S3cure0pt1mz \

>   --from-literal=connectors-secret=S3cureC0nn3ct \
>   --from-literal=console-secret=S3cureC0nsole \
>   --from-literal=zebee-secret=S3cureZ33be \

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Reviewer: Would remove it to make it shorter - its just an example for a user to get the idea.

Author: yeah I actually did have it shorter originally and added it I can remove it makes sense!

Author: removed

  --namespace camunda
```

Or using YAML:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: camunda-platform-secrets
  namespace: camunda
type: Opaque
stringData:
  operate-secret: "S3cure0p3rat3"
  tasklist-secret: "S3cureT4sk"

>   optimize-secret: "S3cure0pt1mz"
>   connectors-secret: "S3cureC0nn3ct"
>   console-secret: "S3cureC0nsole"
>   zeebe-secret: "S3cureZ33be"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  optimize-secret: "S3cure0pt1mz"
```

Reviewer: same here

Author: removed

```

Apply it with:

```sh
kubectl apply -f my-secret.yaml
```

---

> ## Example: Centralized Secret for Multiple Credentials

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Centralized Secret Example
```

Author: done

> In CI/testing environments, it's common to use a single Kubernetes Secret for all credentials. Below is a snippet using `camunda-platform-secrets`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For simplicity in CI or test environments, you can centralize all secrets in a single Kubernetes Secret. Below is a snippet using a secret named `camunda-secret`:
```

Author: done

> > ℹ️ **Note:** This example includes the most common internal secrets. If you're using SMTP, external databases, or connectors with basic auth, you’ll need to add additional secrets for those components, such as:

Reviewer: I would make it again shorter to get the idea - else we need to maintain and change it if we have changes as the users expects it to be complete. The user should just understand the idea - but do it themselves.

Author: i used another example that you had provided.

>
> - `webModeler.restapi.externalDatabase.existingSecret`
> - `webModeler.restapi.mail.existingSecret`
> - `connectors.inbound.auth.existingSecret`
> - `global.license.existingSecret`

```yaml
global:
  secrets:
    autoGenerated: false

>     name: "camunda-platform-secrets"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    name: "camunda-secret"
```

Author: i used `camunda-credentials` i guess either should be fine.

        existingSecretKey: "identity-tasklist-client-password"
      optimize:
        existingSecret:
          name: "camunda-platform-secrets"
        existingSecretKey: "identity-optimize-client-password"
      zeebe:
        existingSecret:
          name: "camunda-platform-secrets"
        existingSecretKey: "identity-zeebe-client-password"
identity:
  firstUser:
    existingSecret: "camunda-platform-secrets"
    existingSecretKey: "identity-user-password"
identityPostgresql:
  auth:
    existingSecret: "camunda-platform-secrets"
identityKeycloak:
  auth:
    existingSecret: "camunda-platform-secrets"
    passwordSecretKey: "identity-keycloak-admin-password"
  postgresql:
    auth:
      existingSecret: "camunda-platform-secrets"
      secretKeys:
        adminPasswordKey: "identity-keycloak-postgresql-admin-password"
        userPasswordKey: "identity-keycloak-postgresql-user-password"
# WebModeler Database.
postgresql:
  enabled: true
  auth:
    existingSecret: "camunda-platform-secrets"
    secretKeys:
      adminPasswordKey: "webmodeler-postgresql-admin-password"
      userPasswordKey: "webmodeler-postgresql-user-password"
```

---

## Disabling Auto-Generated Secrets

> > 🛠️ **Troubleshooting:** If a component fails to start after disabling auto-generated secrets, double-check:

Reviewer: Move this section to the end in an own Troubleshooting section?

Author: moved it to the bottom maybe we can add more details there.

> > 🛠️ **Troubleshooting:** If a component fails to start after disabling auto-generated secrets, double-check:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Troubleshooting:** If a component fails to start after disabling auto-generated secrets, double-check:
```

>
> - The secret exists in the correct namespace
> - The `existingSecretKey` is accurate and matches the Kubernetes secret
> - `autoGenerated: false` is set and all required secrets are provided

By default, the Camunda Helm Chart auto-generates secrets like OAuth client passwords on first install. This ensures the platform can start without manual configuration but can lead to issues on upgrades if the secrets are regenerated.

> To disable auto-generation and use your own pre-created secrets, set:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use only user-defined secrets and prevent regeneration during upgrades::
```

Author: done

```yaml
global:
  secrets:
    autoGenerated: false
```

> This tells the chart to stop generating secrets and instead expect you to provide all necessary secrets via `existingSecret` references.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will stop auto-generating secrets. Ensure:
- All required secrets are created
- The `existingSecretKey` values match the keys in the Kubernetes Secret
- Secrets exist in the correct namespace
```

---

> ## PostgreSQL Secrets and Examples

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## PostgreSQL Configuration Examples
```

This section covers how to configure PostgreSQL secrets used by the Camunda subcharts: Identity, Keycloak, and Web Modeler.

### Web Modeler PostgreSQL (Bitnami Subchart)

> > Web Modeler uses the Bitnami PostgreSQL subchart, which requires both an admin and user password. These must be referenced with `secretKeys` if you are managing secrets manually.

Reviewer: In the whole section try to formulate without using "you"?

Author: updated any sections with you!

identityKeycloak:
  postgresql:
    auth:
      existingSecret: "camunda-platform-secrets"
      secretKeys:
        adminPasswordKey: "identity-keycloak-postgresql-admin-password"
        userPasswordKey: "identity-keycloak-postgresql-user-password"
  auth:
    existingSecret: "camunda-platform-secrets"
    passwordSecretKey: "identity-keycloak-admin-password"
```

---

## TLS Secrets

When exposing Camunda services via Ingress with TLS, you typically need a Kubernetes Secret containing your TLS certificate and private key. This is especially important when using tools like cert-manager or when securing public-facing services.

### Chart Values

Set your TLS secret like this:

```yaml
global:
  ingress:
    tls:
      enabled: true
      secretName: camunda-tls-secret
```

### TLS Secret Example

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: camunda-tls-secret
  namespace: camunda
annotations:
  cert-manager.io/issuer: "letsencrypt-prod"
type: kubernetes.io/tls
data:
  tls.crt: <base64 encoded cert>
  tls.key: <base64 encoded key>
```

Make sure to configure the secret name in your `values.yaml` under `global.ingress.tls.secretName`.

---

## 🔗 Additional References

> - 📘 [Camunda Docs – Create Identity Secrets](https://docs.camunda.io/docs/self-managed/setup/install/#create-identity-secrets)

Author: we removed this

> - 📘 [Camunda Docs – Configure License Key](https://docs.camunda.io/docs/self-managed/setup/install/#configure-license-key)

Author: this was removed
